Update and combine HIP porting guides (#3862)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_porting_guide.rst

CUDA provides separate driver and runtime APIs, while HIP uses a single API.
The two CUDA APIs generally provide similar functionality and are mostly interchangeable.
However, the driver API enables fine-grained control over the kernel-level
initialization, contexts, and module management. While the runtime API automatically
manages contexts and modules. The driver API is suitable for applications that need
tight integration with other systems, or require advanced control over GPU resources.

* Driver API calls begin with the prefix ``cu``, while runtime API calls begin
  with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the driver API contains
  ``cuEventCreate``, while the runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, which
  has similar functionality.

* The driver API offers two additional low-level functionalities not exposed by
  the runtime API: module management ``cuModule*`` and context management
  ``cuCtx*`` APIs.

The HIP runtime API includes corresponding functions for both the CUDA driver and
the CUDA runtime API. The module and context functionality are available with the
``hipModule`` and ``hipCtx`` prefixes, and CUDA driver API functions are usually

> prefixed with ``hipDrv``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``hipModule`` and ``hipCtx`` prefixes, and driver API functions are usually
prefixed with ``hipDrv``.
```

Using CUDA here seems weird to me.

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter presents how to port the CUDA API to HIP API
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, driver API, porting, port

.. _porting_cuda_code:

*******************************************************************************

> Porting CUDA code to HIP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Porting NVIDIA CUDA code to HIP
```

Reviewer 2: First occurrence in a heading

*******************************************************************************

HIP is designed to ease the porting of existing CUDA code into the HIP
environment to let you run your application on AMD GPUs. This page describes
the available tools and provides practical suggestions on how to port your CUDA
code and work through common issues.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HIP eases the porting of existing NVIDIA CUDA code into the HIP environment, enabling you to run your application on AMD GPUs. This topic describes the available tools and provides practical suggestions on how to port your CUDA code and work through common issues.

```

CUDA provides separate driver and runtime APIs, while HIP uses a single API.
The two CUDA APIs generally provide similar functionality and are mostly interchangeable.
However, the CUDA driver API enables fine-grained control over the kernel-level
initialization, contexts, and module management. While the runtime API automatically

> manages contexts and modules. The driver API is suitable for applications that need

Reviewer: I think the "However" and "While" sentences should be combined into one.

> tight integration with other systems, or require advanced control over GPU resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the CUDA driver API provides fine-grained control over kernel-level
initialization, contexts, and module management, while the runtime API automatically
manages contexts and modules. The driver API is suitable for applications that require
tight integration with other systems or advanced control over GPU resources.
```

* Driver API calls begin with the prefix ``cu``, while runtime API calls begin
  with the prefix ``cuda``. For example, the driver API contains
  ``cuEventCreate``, while the runtime API contains ``cudaEventCreate``, which
  has similar functionality.

* The driver API offers two additional low-level functionalities not exposed by
  the runtime API: module management ``cuModule*`` and context management
  ``cuCtx*`` APIs.

The HIP runtime API includes corresponding functions for both the CUDA driver and
the CUDA runtime API. The module and context functionality are available with the
``hipModule`` and ``hipCtx`` prefixes, and driver API functions are usually
prefixed with ``hipDrv``.

Porting a CUDA project
======================

> HIP projects can target either AMD or NVIDIA platforms. HIP is a marshalling language
> that provides a thin-layer mapping to functions in AMD's ROCm language, or to CUDA
> functions. To compile the HIP code, you can use ``amdclang++``, also called HIP-Clang,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HIP projects can target either AMD or NVIDIA platforms. HIP is a marshalling language
that provides a thin-layer mapping to functions in the AMD ROCm language, or to CUDA
functions. To compile the HIP code, you can use ``amdclang++``, also called HIP-Clang,
```

or you can use ``hipcc`` to enable compilation by ``nvcc`` to produce CUDA executables,
as described in :ref:`compilation_platform`. 

Because HIP is a marshalling language that can be compiled by ``nvcc``, mixing HIP code
with CUDA code results in valid application code. This enables users to incrementally port
a CUDA project to HIP, and still compile and test the code during the transition.

> The only notable exception is ``hipError_t``, which is not just an alias to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only notable exception is :cpp:enum:``hipError_t``, which is not just an alias to
```

> ``cudaError_t``. In these cases HIP provides functions to convert between the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``cudaError_t``. In these cases, HIP provides functions to convert between the
```

.. meta::

>   :description: This chapter presents how to port the CUDA API to HIP API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  :description: This chapter presents how to port the CUDA source code to HIP
```

  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, driver API, porting, port

.. _porting_cuda_code:

*******************************************************************************
Porting NVIDIA CUDA code to HIP
*******************************************************************************

HIP eases the porting of existing NVIDIA CUDA code into the HIP
environment, enabling you to run your application on AMD GPUs. This topic describes
the available tools and provides practical suggestions for porting your CUDA
code and working through common issues.

> CUDA provides separate driver and runtime APIs, while HIP uses a single API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CUDA provides separate driver and runtime APIs, while HIP mostly uses a single API.
```

* :cpp:func:`hipCUResultTohipError`

General Tips
------------

> * Starting to port on an NVIDIA machine is often the easiest approach, as the

Reviewer 2: Perhaps use "NVIDIA-based machine"
or is system better than machine, too?

  code can be tested for functionality and performance even if not fully ported
  to HIP.
* Once the CUDA code is ported to HIP and is running on the CUDA machine,

>   compile the HIP code for an AMD machine.

Reviewer 2: Similar comment for AMD machine

> * You can handle platform-specific features through conditional compilation as described

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You can manage platform-specific features through conditional compilation as described
```

  in :ref:`compilation_platform`.
* Use the `HIPIFY <https://github.com/ROCm/HIPIFY>`_ tools to automatically
  convert CUDA code to HIP, as described in the following section.

Using HIPIFY
============

:doc:`HIPIFY <hipify:index>` is a collection of tools that automatically
translate CUDA code to HIP code. For example, ``cuEventCreate`` is translated to
:cpp:func:`hipEventCreate`. HIPIFY tools also convert error codes from the
driver namespace and coding conventions to the equivalent HIP error code.
HIP unifies the APIs for these common functions.

There are two types of HIPIFY available:

* :doc:`hipify-clang <hipify:how-to/hipify-clang>` is a Clang-based tool that parses code,
  translates it into an Abstract Syntax Tree, and generates the HIP source. For this,
  ``hipify-clang`` needs to be able to actually compile the code, so the CUDA code needs
  to be correct, and a CUDA install with all necessary headers must be provided.

> * :doc:`hipify-perl <hipify:how-to/hipify-perl>` uses pattern matching, to translate the
>   CUDA code to HIP. It does not require a working CUDA installation, and can also
>   convert CUDA code, that is not syntactically correct. It is therefore easier to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :doc:`hipify-perl <hipify:how-to/hipify-perl>` uses pattern matching to translate the
  CUDA code to HIP. It does not require a working CUDA installation, and can also
  convert CUDA code, that is not syntactically correct. It's easier to
```

>   set up and use, but is not as powerful as ``hipfiy-clang``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  set up and use, but it's not as powerful as ``hipfiy-clang``.
```

Memory copy functions
---------------------

When copying memory, the CUDA driver includes the memory direction in the name of
the API (``cuMemcpyHtoD``), while the CUDA runtime API provides a single memory
copy API with a parameter that specifies the direction. It also supports a
default direction where the runtime determines the direction automatically.

HIP provides both versions, for example, :cpp:func:`hipMemcpyHtoD` as well as
:cpp:func:`hipMemcpy`. The first version might be faster in some cases because
it avoids any host overhead to detect the direction of the memory copy.

Address spaces
--------------

HIP-Clang defines a process-wide address space where
the CPU and all devices allocate addresses from a single unified pool.
This means addresses can be shared between contexts. Unlike CUDA, a new context
does not create a new address space for the device.

Context stack behavior differences
----------------------------------

HIP-Clang creates a primary context when the HIP API is called. In CUDA
driver API code, HIP-Clang creates a primary context while HIP/NVCC has an empty
context stack. HIP-Clang pushes the primary context to the context stack when it

> is empty. This can lead to subtle differences in applications which mix the
> runtime and driver APIs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is empty. This can lead to subtle differences in applications that mix the
runtime and driver APIs. 
```

Reviewer 2: Not sure about this but 80% sure

Scanning CUDA source to scope the translation
---------------------------------------------

> The ``--examine`` option, supported by the clang and perl versions, tells hipify

Reviewer 4: The ``--examine`` option, supported by both HIPIFY tools, tells the hipify tool
to do a test-run

to do a test-run, without changing the files, but instead scan CUDA code to
determine which files contain CUDA code and how much of that code can

> automatically be hipified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``--examine`` option, supported by the clang and perl versions, tells Hipify
to do a test-run, without changing the files, but instead scan CUDA code to
determine which files contain CUDA code and how much of that code can
automatically be hipified.
```

Reviewer 2: Can we replace "tell"? Perhaps "direct"?
Are we ok using hipified?

Reviewer 4: > Are we ok using hipified?

Yes, we are ok with `hipified` and `hipification` terms.

> There also are ``hipexamine-perl.sh`` or ``hipexamine.sh`` (for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are also ``hipexamine-perl.sh`` or ``hipexamine.sh`` (for
```

translates it into an Abstract Syntax Tree, and generates the HIP source. For this,
``hipify-clang`` needs to be able to actually compile the code, so the CUDA code needs
to be correct, and a CUDA install with all necessary headers must be provided.

* :doc:`hipify-perl <hipify:how-to/hipify-perl>` uses pattern matching, to translate the
CUDA code to HIP. It does not require a working CUDA installation, and can also
convert CUDA code, that is not syntactically correct. It is therefore easier to
set up and use, but is not as powerful as ``hipfiy-clang``.

Memory copy functions
---------------------

When copying memory, the CUDA driver includes the memory direction in the name of
the API (``cuMemcpyHtoD``), while the CUDA runtime API provides a single memory
copy API with a parameter that specifies the direction. It also supports a
default direction where the runtime determines the direction automatically.

HIP provides both versions, for example, :cpp:func:`hipMemcpyHtoD` as well as
:cpp:func:`hipMemcpy`. The first version might be faster in some cases because
it avoids any host overhead to detect the direction of the memory copy.

> Address spaces (related to context)

Reviewer: Is the text enclosed in parentheses supposed to be here?

--------------

``amdclang++``, also known as HIP-Clang, defines a process-wide address space where
the CPU and all devices allocate addresses from a single unified pool.
This means addresses can be shared between contexts. Unlike the original CUDA

> implementation, a new context does not create a new address space for the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means addresses can be shared between contexts. Unlike CUDA, a new context
does not create a new address space for the device.
```

Context stack behavior differences
----------------------------------

HIP-Clang creates a primary context when the HIP API is called. In CUDA
driver API code, HIP-Clang creates a primary context while HIP/NVCC has an empty
context stack. HIP-Clang pushes the primary context to the context stack when it
is empty. This can lead to subtle differences in applications which mix the

> runtime and driver APIs. 

Reviewer: This paragraph is a bit odd. What is the difference between HIP-Clang and HIP? Maybe hipify-clang is meant here?

Author: HIP-Clang is another name for amdclang++, or the compiler. 
https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/llvm-project/en/latest/index.html
Can you provide additional input here?

Reviewer: Ah, so "HIP/NVCC" refers to HIP that launches nvcc under the hood?

* Use the `HIPIFY <https://github.com/ROCm/HIPIFY>`_ tools to automatically

>   convert CUDA code to HIP, as described in the following section.

Reviewer: GitHub won't let me add comments where I want, so placing this here. In the bullet point directly above this one, it says:

> You can handle platform-specific features through conditional compilation or by adding them to the open-source HIP infrastructure.

I don't understand the second half of the sentence. How can a user add platform-specific features to the open-source HIP infrastructure?

Author: Sent a message through Teams.

Using HIPIFY
============

:doc:`HIPIFY <hipify:index>` is a collection of tools that automatically
translate CUDA code to HIP code. For example, ``cuEventCreate`` is translated to
:cpp:func:`hipEventCreate`. HIPIFY tools also convert error codes from the
driver namespace and coding conventions to the equivalent HIP error code.
HIP unifies the APIs for these common functions.

There are two types of HIPIFY available:

* :doc:`hipify-clang <hipify:how-to/hipify-clang>` is a Clang-based tool that parses code,
  translates it into an Abstract Syntax Tree, and generates the HIP source. For this,
  ``hipify-clang`` needs to be able to actually compile the code, so the CUDA code needs
  to be correct, and a CUDA install with all necessary headers must be provided.

* :doc:`hipify-perl <hipify:how-to/hipify-perl>` uses pattern matching, to translate the
  CUDA code to HIP. It does not require a working CUDA installation, and can also
  convert CUDA code, that is not syntactically correct. It is therefore easier to

>   set up and use, but is not as powerful as ``hipfiy-clang``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  set up and use, but is not as powerful as ``hipify-clang``.
```

and potential warnings. In the end it prints a summary for all files.

> 

Reviewer 2: replace e.g. (couple lines above) with "for example,"

Automatically converting a CUDA project
---------------------------------------

> To directly replace the files, the ``--inplace`` option of ``hipify-perl`` or
> ``hipify-clang`` can be used. This creates a backup of the original files in a
> ``<filename>.prehip`` file and overwrites the existing files, keeping their file
> endings. If the ``--inplace`` option is not given, the scripts print the
> hipified code to ``stdout``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To directly replace the files, the ``--inplace`` option of ``hipify-perl`` or
``hipify-clang`` can be used. This creates a backup of the original files in a
``<filename>.prehip`` file and overwrites the existing files, retaining their original file
extensions. If the ``--inplace`` option isn't provided, the scripts print the
hipified code to ``stdout``.
```

``hipconvertinplace.sh`` or ``hipconvertinplace-perl.sh`` operate on whole
directories.

Library equivalents
===================

> ROCm provides libraries to ease porting of code relying on CUDA libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ROCm provides libraries to port code relying on CUDA libraries.
```

Most CUDA libraries have a corresponding HIP library. For more information,

> see either :doc:`ROCm libraries <rocm:reference/api-libraries>` or :doc:`HIPIFY CUDA compatible libraries <hipify:reference/supported_apis>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
see either :doc:`ROCm libraries <rocm:reference/api-libraries>` and :doc:`HIPIFY CUDA compatible libraries <hipify:reference/supported_apis>`.
```

> There are two flavours of libraries provided by ROCm, libraries prefixed with ``hip``
> and libraries prefixed with ``roc``. While both are written using HIP, in general
> only the ``hip``-libraries are portable. The libraries with the ``roc``-prefix
> might also run on CUDA-capable GPUs, however they have been optimized for AMD
> GPUs and might use assembly code or a different API, to achieve the best
> performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ROCM provides two library types: libraries prefixed with ``hip``
and libraries prefixed with ``roc``. While both are written using HIP, in general,
only the ``hip``-libraries are portable. The libraries with the ``roc``-prefix
might also run on CUDA-capable GPUs, however, they have been optimized for AMD
GPUs and might use assembly code or a different API to achieve the best
performance.
```

> In the case where a library provides both ``roc`` and ``hip`` versions, such as
> ``hipSparse`` and ``rocSparse``, the ``hip`` version is a marshalling library,
> which is just a thin layer that redirects function calls to either the
> ``roc`` library or the corresponding CUDA library, depending on the target platform.  
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In cases where a library provides both ``roc`` and ``hip`` versions, such as
``hipSparse`` and ``rocSparse``, the ``hip`` version serves as a marshalling library. This 
is a thin layer that redirects function calls to either the
``roc`` library or the corresponding CUDA library, depending on the target platform.  

```

.. note::

  If the application is only required to run on AMD GPUs, it is recommended to use

>   the ``roc``-libraries. In hipify, this can be accomplished using the ``--roc`` option. 

Reviewer 2: Should "hipify" always be full cap?
<img width="1428" height="327" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a27e4745-242d-4e27-ac02-cf99a931b968" />

be used together. Of course, it is possible to create a program with no kernels and
no automatic loading.

For ``hipModule`` API reference content, see :ref:`module_management_reference`.

Using hipModuleLaunchKernel
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Both CUDA driver and runtime APIs define a function for launching kernels,
called ``cuLaunchKernel`` or ``cudaLaunchKernel``. The equivalent API in HIP is
:cpp:func:`hipModuleLaunchKernel`. The kernel arguments and the execution
configuration (grid dimensions, group dimensions, dynamic shared memory, and
stream) are passed as arguments to the launch function.

The HIP runtime API additionally supports the triple chevron (``<<< >>>``) syntax for launching
kernels, which resembles a special function call and is easier to use than the
explicit launch API, especially when handling kernel arguments. 

.. _context_driver_api:

cuCtx and hipCtx
----------------

The CUDA driver API defines "Context" and "Devices" as separate entities.
Contexts contain a single device, and a device can theoretically have multiple contexts.
Each context contains a set of streams and events specific to the context.

> The ``cuCtx`` API also provide a mechanism to switch between devices, which enables a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``cuCtx`` API also provides a mechanism to switch between devices, which enables a
```

single CPU thread to send commands to different GPUs. HIP and recent versions of the
CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this, such as using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.

On the other hand, the CUDA runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the
APIs and has little loss of functionality because each context can contain a
single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts have been replaced with other interfaces.

HIP provides a Context API as a thin layer over the existing device functions to facilitate
easy porting from existing driver API code. The ``hipCtx`` functions largely provide an
alternate syntax for changing the active device. The ``hipCtx`` API can be used to set the
current context or to query properties of the device associated with the context. The current
context is implicitly used by other APIs, such as ``hipStreamCreate``.

.. note:: 

>   The ``hipCtx`` API is **deprecated** and its use is discouraged. Most new applications use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The ``hipCtx`` API is deprecated and its use is discouraged. Most new applications use
```

  ``hipSetDevice`` or the ``hipStream`` APIs. For more details on deprecated APIs, see :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.

.. _compilation_platform:

Compilation and platforms
=========================

> HIP projects can target either AMD or NVIDIA platforms. The platform affects
> which backend-headers are included and which libraries are used for linking. The
> created binaries are not portable between AMD and NVIDIA platforms, and instead
> must be separately compiled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HIP projects can target either AMD or NVIDIA platforms. The platform determines
which backend headers are included and which libraries are used for linking. The
created binaries are not portable between AMD and NVIDIA platforms, and instead
must be compiled separately.
```

``hipcc`` is a portable compiler driver that calls ``amdclang++`` (on AMD systems)
or ``nvcc`` (on NVIDIA systems), passing the necessary options to the target
compiler. Tools that call ``hipcc`` must ensure the compiler options are appropriate
for the target compiler.

``hipconfig`` is a helpful tool in identifying the current systems platform,
compiler and runtime. It can also help set options appropriately. As an example,

> ``hipconfig`` can provide a path to HIP, in Makefiles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``hipconfig`` is a helpful tool for identifying the current system's platform,
compiler, and runtime. It can also help set options appropriately. As an example,
``hipconfig`` can provide a path to HIP, in Makefiles:
```

.. code-block:: shell

  HIP_PATH ?= $(shell hipconfig --path)

.. note::
  You can use ``amdclang++`` to target NVIDIA systems, but you must manually specify

>   the required options for the compiler. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  You can use ``amdclang++`` to target NVIDIA systems, but you must manually specify
  the required compiler options. 
```

HIP Headers
-----------

The ``hip_runtime.h`` headers define all the necessary types, functions, macros,
etc., needed to compile a HIP program, this includes host as well as device
code. ``hip_runtime_api.h`` is a subset of ``hip_runtime.h``.

CUDA has slightly different contents for these two files. In some cases you may

> need to convert hipified code to include the richer ``hip_runtime.h`` instead of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CUDA has slightly different contents for these two files. In some cases, you might
need to convert hipified code to include the richer ``hip_runtime.h`` instead of
```

``hip_runtime_api.h``.

Using a Standard C++ Compiler
-----------------------------

A source file that is only calling HIP APIs but neither defines nor launches
any kernels can be compiled with a standard C or C++ compiler (GCC or MSVC for example )
even when ``hip_runtime_api.h`` or ``hip_runtime.h`` are included. The HIP include
paths and platform macros (``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` or ``__HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__``)
must be passed to the compiler.

``hipconfig`` can help define the necessary options, for example on an AMD
platform:

.. code-block:: bash

  hipconfig --cpp_config
   -D__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__= -I/opt/rocm/include

``nvcc`` includes some headers by default. ``hipcc`` does not include
default headers, and instead you must explicitly include all required files.

.. note::
  The ``hipify`` tool automatically converts ``cuda_runtime.h`` to ``hip_runtime.h``,
  and it converts ``cuda_runtime_api.h`` to ``hip_runtime_api.h``, but it may
  miss nested headers or macros.

> Compiler Defines for HIP and CUDA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compiler defines for HIP and CUDA
```

---------------------------------

C++-macros can be used to write code that is specific to a platform. This
section lists macros that are defined by compilers and the HIP/CUDA APIs,

> and what compiler/platform combinations they are defined for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
section lists macros that are defined by compilers and the HIP/CUDA APIs,
and for which compiler/platform combinations they are defined.
```

Author: This comment seems to appear twice?

> C++-macros can be used to write code that is specific to a platform. This
> section lists macros that are defined by compilers and the HIP/CUDA APIs,
> and what compiler/platform combinations they are defined for.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
C++-macros can be used to write code that is specific to a platform. This
section lists macros defined by compilers and the HIP/CUDA APIs,
along with the compiler/platform combinations for which they are defined.

```

Author: and the compiler/platform combinations that define them.

and potential warnings. In the end it prints a summary for all files.

Automatically converting a CUDA project
---------------------------------------

To directly replace the files, the ``--inplace`` option of ``hipify-perl`` or
``hipify-clang`` can be used. This creates a backup of the original files in a
``<filename>.prehip`` file and overwrites the existing files, keeping their file
endings. If the ``--inplace`` option is not given, the scripts print the
hipified code to ``stdout``.

``hipconvertinplace.sh`` or ``hipconvertinplace-perl.sh`` operate on whole
directories.

Library equivalents
===================

ROCm provides libraries to ease porting of code relying on CUDA libraries.
Most CUDA libraries have a corresponding HIP library. For more information,

> see :ref:`<hipify:reference/supported_apis>`, or :ref:`<rocm:reference/api-libraries>`.

Author: ```suggestion
see either :doc:`ROCm libraries <rocm:reference/api-libraries>` or :doc:`HIPIFY CUDA compatible libraries <hipify:reference/supported_apis>`.
```

There are two flavours of libraries provided by ROCm, ones prefixed with ``hip``

> and ones prefixed with ``roc``. While both are written using HIP, in general

Reviewer: > ones prefixed with ``hip`` and ones prefixed with ``roc``

Is the "ones ... and ones ..." expression used in English? I've never heard that one before, but I'm not a native speaker.

Author: It is not uncommon, but I have replaced it with libraries.

GPUs and might use assembly code or a different API, to achieve the best
performance.

In the case where a library provides both ``roc`` and ``hip``versions, such as
``hipSparse`` and ``rocSparse``, the ``hip`` version is a marshalling library,
which is just a thin layer that redirects function calls to either the
``roc`` library or the corresponding CUDA library, depending on the target platform.

.. note::

  If the application is only required to run on AMD GPUs, it is recommended to use
  the ``roc``-libraries. In hipify, this can be accomplished using the ``--roc`` option. 

> Table of libraries (does this need to be updated?)

Reviewer: Or here?

flow. Other environments have many kernels and don't want all of them to be
loaded automatically. The Module functions load the generated code objects and
launch kernels. 

Like the ``cuModule`` API, the ``hipModule`` API provides additional control
over code object management, including options to load code from files or from
in-memory pointers. 

NVCC and HIP-Clang target different architectures and use different code object
formats. NVCC supports ``cubin`` or ``ptx`` files, while the HIP-Clang path uses
the ``hsaco`` format. The external compilers that generate these code objects are
responsible for generating and loading the correct code object for each platform.
Notably, there is no fat binary format that can contain code for both NVCC and
HIP-Clang platforms. The following table summarizes the formats used on each
platform:

.. list-table:: Module formats
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Format
     - APIs
     - NVCC
     - HIP-CLANG
   * - Code object
     - ``hipModuleLoad``, ``hipModuleLoadData``
     - ``.cubin`` or PTX text
     - ``.hsaco``
   * - Fat binary
     - ``hipModuleLoadFatBin``
     - ``.fatbin``
     - ``.hip_fatbin``

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

GPUs and might use assembly code or a different API, to achieve the best
performance.

> In the case where a library provides both ``roc`` and ``hip``versions, such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case where a library provides both ``roc`` and ``hip`` versions, such as
```

This breaks formatting.

``hipSparse`` and ``rocSparse``, the ``hip`` version is a marshalling library,
which is just a thin layer that redirects function calls to either the
``roc`` library or the corresponding CUDA library, depending on the target platform.  

.. note::

  If the application is only required to run on AMD GPUs, it is recommended to use
  the ``roc``-libraries. In hipify, this can be accomplished using the ``--roc`` option. 

> cuModule and hipModule

Reviewer 5: These section can not go under library equivalents section. Probable create an umbrella CUDA driver API equivalent sections for cuModule and hipModule and cuCtx and hipCtx

Reviewer 4: `In hipify` -> `In hipify tools`

Author: I changed Library equivalents to Library and driver equivalents. Hopefully that helps.

directly, such as a new accelerator language front end. NVCC is not used here.
Instead, the environment might have a different kernel language or compilation
flow. Other environments have many kernels and don't want all of them to be
loaded automatically. The Module functions load the generated code objects and
launch kernels. 

Like the ``cuModule`` API, the ``hipModule`` API provides additional control
over code object management, including options to load code from files or from
in-memory pointers. 

NVCC and HIP-Clang target different architectures and use different code object
formats. NVCC supports ``cubin`` or ``ptx`` files, while the HIP-Clang path uses
the ``hsaco`` format. The external compilers that generate these code objects are
responsible for generating and loading the correct code object for each platform.
Notably, there is no fat binary format that can contain code for both NVCC and
HIP-Clang platforms. The following table summarizes the formats used on each
platform:

.. list-table:: Module formats
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Format
     - APIs
     - NVCC
     - HIP-CLANG
   * - Code object

>      - ``hipModuleLoad``, ``hipModuleLoadData``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - :cpp:func:``hipModuleLoad``, :cpp:func:``hipModuleLoadData``
```

     - ``.cubin`` or PTX text
     - ``.hsaco``
   * - Fat binary

>      - ``hipModuleLoadFatBin``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - :cpp:func:``hipModuleLoadFatBinary``
```

cuCtx and hipCtx
----------------

The CUDA driver API defines "Context" and "Devices" as separate entities.
Contexts contain a single device, and a device can theoretically have multiple contexts.
Each context contains a set of streams and events specific to the context.
The ``cuCtx`` API also provide a mechanism to switch between devices, which enables a
single CPU thread to send commands to different GPUs. HIP and recent versions of the
CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this, such as using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.

On the other hand, the CUDA runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the
APIs and has little loss of functionality because each context can contain a
single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts have been replaced with other interfaces.

HIP provides a Context API as a thin layer over the existing device functions to facilitate
easy porting from existing driver API code. The ``hipCtx`` functions largely provide an
alternate syntax for changing the active device. The ``hipCtx`` API can be used to set the
current context or to query properties of the device associated with the context. The current

> context is implicitly used by other APIs, such as ``hipStreamCreate``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
context is implicitly used by other APIs, such as :cpp:func:``hipStreamCreate``.
```

.. note:: 
  The ``hipCtx`` API is **deprecated** and its use is discouraged. Most new applications use

>   ``hipSetDevice`` or the ``hipStream`` APIs. For more details on deprecated APIs, see :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :cpp:func:``hipSetDevice`` or the ``hipStream`` APIs. For more details on deprecated APIs, see :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.
```

   - Communications Primitives Library based on the MPI equivalents
     RCCL is a drop-in replacement for NCCL

cuModule and hipModule
----------------------

The ``cuModule`` feature of the driver API provides additional control over how and
when accelerator code objects are loaded. For example, the driver API enables

> code objects to load from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code objects to be loaded from files or memory pointers. Symbols for kernels or
```

the ``hsaco`` format. The external compilers that generate these code objects are
responsible for generating and loading the correct code object for each platform.
Notably, there is no fat binary format that can contain code for both NVCC and
HIP-Clang platforms. The following table summarizes the formats used on each
platform:

.. list-table:: Module formats
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Format
     - APIs
     - NVCC
     - HIP-CLANG
   * - Code object
     - ``hipModuleLoad``, ``hipModuleLoadData``
     - ``.cubin`` or PTX text
     - ``.hsaco``
   * - Fat binary
     - ``hipModuleLoadFatBin``
     - ``.fatbin``
     - ``.hip_fatbin``

``hipcc`` uses HIP-Clang or NVCC to compile host code. Both of these compilers can
embed code objects into the final executable. These code objects are automatically
loaded when the application starts. The ``hipModule`` API can be used to load
additional code objects. When used this way, it extends the capability of the
automatically loaded code objects. HIP-Clang enables both of these capabilities to
be used together. Of course, it is possible to create a program with no kernels and
no automatic loading.

> For module API reference, visit :ref:`module_management_reference`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the module API reference, visit :ref:`module_management_reference`.
```

> Using hipModuleLaunchKernel (is this still needed?)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using hipModuleLaunchKernel (is this still needed?)
```

Yes - it is essential for launching kernels from pre-built modules (as described in your text above).

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Both CUDA driver and runtime APIs define a function for launching kernels,
called ``cuLaunchKernel`` or ``cudaLaunchKernel``. The equivalent API in HIP is
:cpp:func:`hipModuleLaunchKernel`. The kernel arguments and the execution
configuration (grid dimensions, group dimensions, dynamic shared memory, and
stream) are passed as arguments to the launch function.

The runtime API additionally provides the triple chevron (``<<< >>>``) syntax for launching
kernels, which resembles a special function call and is easier to use than the
explicit launch API, especially when handling kernel arguments. 

> .. note::   (is this true? Doesn't HIP-Clang also support this?)

Reviewer: Yes, HIP-Clang also supports this. This section is possibly a relic from the old days.

  However, this syntax is not standard C++ and is available only when NVCC is used
  to compile the host code.

hipModule and texture driver API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HIP supports texture driver APIs. However, texture references must be declared
within the host scope. The following code demonstrates the use of texture

> references for the ``__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__`` platform.

Reviewer: Texture references are deprecated; IMO we shouldn't put any effort into documenting them. CUDA already dropped them. My suggestion is to drop all mentions of texture references; they have been succeeded by texture objects.

        hipTexRefSetAddressMode(texref, 0, hipAddressModeWrap);
        hipTexRefSetAddressMode(texref, 1, hipAddressModeWrap);
        hipTexRefSetFilterMode(texref, hipFilterModePoint);
        hipTexRefSetFlags(texref, 0);
        hipTexRefSetFormat(texref, HIP_AD_FORMAT_FLOAT, 1);
        hipTexRefSetArray(texref, array, HIP_TRSA_OVERRIDE_FORMAT);

      // ...
    }

.. _context_driver_api:

cuCtx and hipCtx
----------------

The CUDA driver API defines "Context" and "Devices" as separate entities.
Contexts contain a single device, and a device can theoretically have multiple contexts.
Each context contains a set of streams and events specific to the context.
The ``cuCtx`` API also provide a mechanism to switch between devices, which enables a
single CPU thread to send commands to different GPUs. HIP and recent versions of the
CUDA Runtime provide other mechanisms to accomplish this, such as using streams or ``cudaSetDevice``.

(This should be validateda - This might no longer be true?)
Historically, contexts also defined a unique address space for the GPU. 
This might no longer be the case in unified memory platforms, because the CPU and all the

> devices in the same process share a single unified address space.

Reviewer: All 64-bit processes with CUDA GPUs use unified address spaces. We would need to verify whether there are still platforms out there that have CUDA support and are not 64-bit.

On the other hand, the CUDA runtime API unifies the Context API with the Device API. This simplifies the
APIs and has little loss of functionality because each context can contain a
single device, and the benefits of multiple contexts have been replaced with other interfaces.

HIP provides a Context API as a thin layer over the existing device functions to facilitate
easy porting from existing driver API code. The ``hipCtx`` functions largely provide an
alternate syntax for changing the active device. The ``hipCtx`` API can be used to set the
current context or to query properties of the device associated with the context. The current
context is implicitly used by other APIs, such as ``hipStreamCreate``.

.. note:: 
  Most new applications preferentially use ``hipSetDevice`` or the stream APIs. Therefore,
  HIP has marked the ``hipCtx`` APIs as **deprecated**. Support for these APIs might not be
  available in future releases. For more details on deprecated APIs, see
  :doc:`../reference/deprecated_api_list`.

> For context reference, visit :ref:`context_management_reference`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the context management API reference, visit :ref:`context_management_reference`.
```

.. code-block:: cpp

  //#if __CUDA_ARCH__ >= 130 // does not properly specify what feature is required, not portable
  #if __HIP_ARCH_HAS_DOUBLES__ == 1 // explicitly specifies what feature is required, portable between AMD and NVIDIA GPUs
    // device code
  #endif

For host code, the ``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` defines are set to 0, if
``hip_runtime.h`` is included, and undefined otherwise. It should not be relied
upon in host code.

Host code feature identification
--------------------------------

> Host code can not rely on the ``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` macros, as the GPUs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Host code must not rely on the ``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` macros, as the GPUs
```

   discouraged, as this is not portable. Use the ``__HIP_ARCH_HAS_<FEATURE>``
   macros instead.

.. _identifying_compiler_target:

Identifying the compilation target platform
-------------------------------------------

> Despite HIP's portability, it can be necessary to tailor code to a specific

Reviewer 2: Is there a more positive way to talk say this instead of "despite"?
remove necessary

  hipcc main.cpp

> Identifying Host or Device Compilation Pass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Identifying host or device compilation pass
```

-------------------------------------------

``amdclang++`` makes multiple passes over the code: one pass for the host code, and
for the device code one pass for each GPU architecture to be compiled for.
``nvcc`` only makes two passes over the code: one for host code and one for device

> code. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``amdclang++`` makes multiple passes over the code: one pass for the host code, and
for the device code, one pass for each GPU architecture to be compiled for.
``nvcc`` only makes two passes over the code: one for the host code and one for device
code. 
```

as the global symbol ``__hip_fatbin`` in the ``.hip_fatbin`` section of the ELF
file of the executable or shared object.

Initialization and termination functions
----------------------------------------

HIP-Clang generates initialization and termination functions for each
translation unit for host code compilation. The initialization functions call
``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` to register the fat binary embedded in the ELF file.
They also call ``__hipRegisterFunction`` and ``__hipRegisterVar`` to register
kernel functions and device-side global variables. The termination functions
call ``__hipUnregisterFatBinary``.

HIP-Clang emits a global variable ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` of type ``void**``
with ``linkonce`` linkage and an initial value of 0 for each host translation
unit. Each initialization function checks ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` and registers
the fat binary only if ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` is 0. It saves the return value
of ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` to ``__hip_gpubin_handle``. This ensures that the fat
binary is registered once. A similar check is performed in the termination
functions.

Kernel launching
----------------

> HIP-Clang supports kernel launching using either the triple chevron (``<<<>>>``) syntax,
> :cpp:func:`hipLaunchKernel`, or :cpp:func:`hipLaunchKernelGGL`. The last option is a macro which
> expands to the ``<<<>>>`` syntax by default. It can also be turned into a template by
> defining ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HIP-Clang supports kernel launching using either the triple chevron (``<<<>>>``) syntax,
:cpp:func:`hipLaunchKernel`, or :cpp:func:`hipLaunchKernelGGL`. The last option is a macro that
expands to the ``<<<>>>`` syntax by default. It can also be turned into a template by
defining ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH``.
```

When the executable or shared library is loaded by the dynamic linker, the
initialization functions are called. In the initialization functions, the code
objects containing all kernels are loaded when ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` is
called. When ``__hipRegisterFunction`` is called, the stub functions are
associated with the corresponding kernels in the code objects.

HIP-Clang implements two sets of APIs for launching kernels.
By default, when HIP-Clang encounters the ``<<<>>>`` statement in the host code,
it first calls :cpp:func:`hipConfigureCall` to set up the threads and grids. It then
calls the stub function with the given arguments. The stub function calls
:cpp:func:`hipSetupArgument` for each kernel argument, then calls :cpp:func:`hipLaunchByPtr`

> with a function pointer to the stub function. In ``hipLaunchByPtr``, the actual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a function pointer to the stub function. In :cpp:func:``hipLaunchByPtr``, the actual
```

kernel associated with the stub function is launched.

NVCC implementation notes
=========================

CUDA applications might want to mix CUDA code with HIP code (see the

> example below). This table shows the equivalence between CUDA and HIP types

Reviewer 2: Please re-phrase this. 
CUDA applications don't "want" to do anything. 
Is it equivalence or equivalent?

required to implement this interaction.

.. list-table:: Equivalence table between HIP and CUDA types
   :header-rows: 1

   * - HIP type
     - CU Driver type
     - CUDA Runtime type

>    * - ``hipModule_t``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipModule_t``
```

     - ``CUmodule``
     -

>    * - ``hipFunction_t``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipFunction_t``
```

     - ``CUfunction``
     -

>    * - ``hipCtx_t``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipCtx_t``
```

     - ``CUcontext``
     -

>    * - ``hipDevice_t``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipDevice_t``
```

     - ``CUdevice``
     -

>    * - ``hipStream_t``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipStream_t``
```

     - ``CUstream``
     - ``cudaStream_t``

>    * - ``hipEvent_t``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipEvent_t``
```

     - ``CUevent``
     - ``cudaEvent_t``

>    * - ``hipArray``
>      - ``CUarray``
>      - ``cudaArray``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - :cpp:type:``hipArray_t``
     - ``CUarray``
     - ``cudaArray_t``
```

Compilation options
-------------------

> The ``hipModule_t`` interface does not support the ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` function,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :cpp:type:``hipModule_t`` interface does not support the ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` function,
```

which is used to control PTX compilation options. HIP-Clang does not use PTX, so
it does not support these compilation options. In fact, HIP-Clang code objects contain
fully compiled code for a device-specific instruction set and don't require additional
compilation as a part of the load step. The corresponding HIP function :cpp:func:`hipModuleLoadDataEx`
behaves like :cpp:func:`hipModuleLoadData` on the HIP-Clang path (where compilation options
are not used) and like ``cuModuleLoadDataEx`` on the NVCC path.

For example:

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: HIP

        .. code-block:: cpp

            hipModule_t module;
            void *imagePtr = ...; // Somehow populate data pointer with code object

            const int numOptions = 1;
            hipJitOption options[numOptions];
            void *optionValues[numOptions];

            options[0] = hipJitOptionMaxRegisters;
            unsigned maxRegs = 15;
            optionValues[0] = (void *)(&maxRegs);

            // hipModuleLoadData(module, imagePtr) will be called on HIP-Clang path, JIT

>             // options will not be used, and cupModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            // options will not be used, and cuModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr,
```

            // numOptions, options, optionValues) will be called on NVCC path
            hipModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr, numOptions, options, optionValues);

            hipFunction_t k;
            hipModuleGetFunction(&k, module, "myKernel");

    .. tab-item:: CUDA

        .. code-block:: cpp

            CUmodule module;
            void *imagePtr = ...; // Somehow populate data pointer with code object

            const int numOptions = 1;
            CUJit_option options[numOptions];
            void *optionValues[numOptions];

            options[0] = CU_JIT_MAX_REGISTERS;
            unsigned maxRegs = 15;
            optionValues[0] = (void *)(&maxRegs);

            cuModuleLoadDataEx(module, imagePtr, numOptions, options, optionValues);

            CUfunction k;
            cuModuleGetFunction(&k, module, "myKernel");

> The sample below shows how to use ``hipModuleGetFunction``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sample below shows how to use :cpp:func:``hipModuleGetFunction``.
```

        // Actually launch kernel
        HIPCHECK(hipModuleLaunchKernel(Function, blocks, 1, 1, threads_per_block, 1, 1, 0, 0, NULL, config));

        HIPCHECK(hipMemcpyDtoH(A.data(), d_A, elements));
        HIPCHECK(hipMemcpyDtoH(B.data(), d_B, elements));

        #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
        HIPCHECK(hipCtxDetach(context));
        #endif

        HIPCHECK(hipFree(d_A));
        HIPCHECK(hipFree(d_B));

        return 0;
    }

.. _identifying_device_architecture_features:

Identifying Device Architecture Features
================================================================================
Identifying device architecture and features
============================================

GPUs of different generations and architectures do not all provide the same
GPUs of different generations and architectures do not provide the same
level of :doc:`hardware feature support <../reference/hardware_features>`. To
guard device-code using these architecture dependent features, the
``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` C++-macros can be used.
guard device-code that uses architecture dependent features, the
``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` C++-macros can be used, as described below. 

> Device Code Feature Identification

Reviewer 2: To guard device code that uses architecture-dependent features...

   - ``hasDynamicParallelism``
   - Ability to launch a kernel from within a kernel

warpSize
========

Code should not assume a warp size of 32 or 64, as that is not portable between
platforms and architectures. The ``warpSize`` built-in should be used in device
code, while the host can query it during runtime via the device properties. See
the :ref:`HIP language extension for warpSize <warp_size>` for information on

> how to write portable wave-aware code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how to write portable warp-size-aware code.
```

"Wave" is coming out of nowhere here.

``hip_runtime_api.h``.

Using a Standard C++ Compiler
-----------------------------

A source file that is only calling HIP APIs but neither defines nor launches

> any kernels can be compiled with a standard C or C++ compiler (``gcc`` or ``icc`` for example )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any kernels can be compiled with a standard C or C++ compiler (GCC or MSVC for example )
```

icc has been deprecated a while ago. Better use something recent.

   -D__HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__= -I/opt/rocm/include

``nvcc`` includes some headers by default. ``hipcc`` does not include
default headers, and instead you must explicitly include all required files.

.. note::
  The ``hipify`` tool automatically converts ``cuda_runtime.h`` to ``hip_runtime.h``,
  and it converts ``cuda_runtime_api.h`` to ``hip_runtime_api.h``, but it may
  miss nested headers or macros.

Compiler Defines for HIP and CUDA
---------------------------------

C++-macros can be used to write code that is specific to a platform. This
section lists macros that are defined by compilers and the HIP/CUDA APIs,
and what compiler/platform combinations they are defined for.

The following table lists the macros that can be used when compiling HIP. Most
of these macros are not directly defined by the compilers, but in
``hip_common.h``, which is included by ``hip_runtime.h``.

.. list-table:: HIP-related defines
  :header-rows: 1

  *
   - Macro
   - ``amdclang++``
   - ``nvcc`` when used as backend for ``hipcc``

>    - Other (GCC, ICC, Clang, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Other (GCC, MSVC, Clang, etc.)
```

code objects for different device targets into one fat binary, which is embedded
as the global symbol ``__hip_fatbin`` in the ``.hip_fatbin`` section of the ELF
file of the executable or shared object.

Initialization and termination functions
----------------------------------------

HIP-Clang generates initialization and termination functions for each
translation unit for host code compilation. The initialization functions call
``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` to register the fat binary embedded in the ELF file.
They also call ``__hipRegisterFunction`` and ``__hipRegisterVar`` to register
kernel functions and device-side global variables. The termination functions
call ``__hipUnregisterFatBinary``.

HIP-Clang emits a global variable ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` of type ``void**``
with ``linkonce`` linkage and an initial value of 0 for each host translation
unit. Each initialization function checks ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` and registers
the fat binary only if ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` is 0. It saves the return value
of ``__hip_gpubin_handle`` to ``__hip_gpubin_handle``. This ensures that the fat
binary is registered once. A similar check is performed in the termination

> functions.

Reviewer: These paragraphs are specific to ELF, i.e. Linux. Do we also want to document how this works for PE / Windows?

Author: Can you provide additional input here?

Reviewer: Not immediately, I'd need to look up the information first (or request it from the HIP-Clang team). We can leave it as-is for now and add this to our backlog.

Kernel launching
----------------

HIP-Clang supports kernel launching using either the triple chevron (``<<<>>>``) syntax,
:cpp:func:`hipLaunchKernel`, or :cpp:func:`hipLaunchKernelGGL`. The last option is a macro which
expands to the ``<<<>>>`` syntax by default. It can also be turned into a template by
defining ``HIP_TEMPLATE_KERNEL_LAUNCH``.

When the executable or shared library is loaded by the dynamic linker, the
initialization functions are called. In the initialization functions, the code
objects containing all kernels are loaded when ``__hipRegisterFatBinary`` is
called. When ``__hipRegisterFunction`` is called, the stub functions are
associated with the corresponding kernels in the code objects.

> HIP-Clang implements two sets of APIs for launching kernels.

Reviewer: What is the second set?

Author: HIP-Clang implements two sets of APIs for launching kernels:
1. By default, when HIP-Clang encounters the <<<>>> statement in the host code, it first calls hipConfigureCall to set up the threads and grids. It then calls the stub function with the given arguments. 
2. The stub function calls hipSetupArgument for each kernel argument, then calls hipLaunchByPtr with a function pointer to the stub function. In hipLaunchByPtr, the actual kernel associated with the stub function is launched.

-or- 

1. By default, when HIP-Clang encounters the <<<>>> statement in the host code, it first calls hipConfigureCall to set up the threads and grids. It then calls the stub function with the given arguments. The stub function calls hipSetupArgument for each kernel argument, then calls hipLaunchByPtr with a function pointer to the stub function. 
2. In hipLaunchByPtr, the actual kernel associated with the stub function is launched.

Reviewer: Are those distinct sets? When reading the paragraph from top to bottom, this sounds like a logical sequence of events:

* Encounter `<<<>>>`, then
* call `hipConfigureCall` for the grid configuration, then
* call the stub function, then
* call `hipSetupArgument` for each kernel argument, then
* call `hipLaunchByPtr`, then
* launch actual kernel.

I think we need some input from the HIP-Clang team here, I assume the "two sets" description comes from them.

Author: @jujiang-del or @yxsamliu can you comment on this question and the issue of the two sets of APIs for launching kernels?

        std::vector<void*> argBuffer{&d_A, &d_B};
        size_t arg_size_bytes = argBuffer.size() * sizeof(void*);

        // Create configuration passed to the kernel as arguments
        void* config[] = {HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_POINTER, argBuffer.data(),
                          HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_BUFFER_SIZE, &arg_size_bytes, HIP_LAUNCH_PARAM_END};

        int threads_per_block = 128;
        int blocks = (elements + threads_per_block - 1) / threads_per_block;

        // Actually launch kernel
        HIPCHECK(hipModuleLaunchKernel(Function, blocks, 1, 1, threads_per_block, 1, 1, 0, 0, NULL, config));

        HIPCHECK(hipMemcpyDtoH(A.data(), d_A, elements));
        HIPCHECK(hipMemcpyDtoH(B.data(), d_B, elements));

        #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
        HIPCHECK(hipCtxDetach(context));
        #endif

        HIPCHECK(hipFree(d_A));
        HIPCHECK(hipFree(d_B));

        return 0;
    }

Porting from CUDA __launch_bounds__
===================================

CUDA also defines a ``__launch_bounds__`` qualifier which works similar to HIP's
implementation, however it uses different parameters:

.. note::
  What does "HIP's implementation" refer to here? 

> 

Reviewer: HIP also supports launch bounds, which is what is probably meant here.

.. code-block:: cpp

  //#if __CUDA_ARCH__ >= 130 // does not properly specify what feature is required, not portable
  #if __HIP_ARCH_HAS_DOUBLES__ == 1 // explicitly specifies what feature is required, portable between AMD and NVIDIA GPUs
    // device code
  #endif

For host code, the ``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` defines are set to 0, if
``hip_runtime.h`` is included, and undefined otherwise. It should not be relied
upon in host code.

Host code feature identification
--------------------------------

The host code must not rely on the ``__HIP_ARCH_<FEATURE>__`` macros, because the
GPUs available to a system are not known during compile time, and their
architectural features differ. Alternatively, the host code can query architecture

> feature flags during runtime, by using :cpp:func:`hipGetDeviceProperties`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
feature flags during runtime by using :cpp:func:`hipGetDeviceProperties`
```

    std::cout << " shared int32 atomic operations" << std::endl;
  }

> Table of feature macros and properties

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Feature macros and properties
```

--------------------------------------

The table below shows the full set of architectural properties that HIP

> supports, together with the corresponding macros and device properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following table lists the HIP architectural properties, together with the corresponding macros and device properties.
```

      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to set memory." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Synchronize the stream
      res = hipStreamSynchronize(stream);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to synchronize stream." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      std::cout << "Operation completed successfully using per-thread default stream." << std::endl;

      // Free the allocated memory
      hipFree(d_ptr);

      return 0;
  }

Accessing new HIP features with a newer driver
----------------------------------------------

HIP is designed to be forward compatible, allowing newer features to be utilized
with older toolkits, provided a compatible driver is present. Feature support
can be verified through runtime API functions and version checks. This approach
ensures that applications can benefit from new features and improvements in the
HIP runtime without needing to be recompiled with a newer toolkit. The function
:cpp:func:`hipGetProcAddress` enables dynamic querying and the use of newer
functions offered by the HIP runtime, even if the application was built with an
older toolkit.

.. note::

>   ``hipGetProcAddress`` and its CUDA counterpart ``cuGetProcAddress`` are limited
>   to HIP/CUDA driver API function calls. For HIP/CUDA runtime API calls,the corresponding
>   function is ``hipGetDriverEntryPoint`` / ``cudaGetDriverEntryPoint``. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :cpp:func:``hipGetProcAddress`` and its CUDA counterpart ``cuGetProcAddress`` are limited
  to HIP/CUDA driver API function calls. For HIP/CUDA runtime API calls,the corresponding
  function is :cpp:func:``hipGetDriverEntryPoint`` / ``cudaGetDriverEntryPoint``. 
```

>   ``hipGetProcAddress`` and its CUDA counterpart ``cuGetProcAddress`` are limited
>   to HIP/CUDA driver API function calls. For HIP/CUDA runtime API calls,the corresponding
>   function is ``hipGetDriverEntryPoint`` / ``cudaGetDriverEntryPoint``. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :cpp:func:``hipGetProcAddress`` and its CUDA counterpart ``cuGetProcAddress`` are limited
  to HIP/CUDA driver API function calls. For HIP/CUDA runtime API calls,the corresponding
  function is :cpp:func:``hipGetDriverEntryPoint`` / ``cudaGetDriverEntryPoint``. 
```

An example is provided for a hypothetical ``foo()`` function.

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Get the address of the foo function
  foo_t fooFunc;
  int hipVersion = 60300000; // HIP version number (e.g. 6.3.0)
  uint64_t flags = 0; // No special flags
  hipDriverProcAddressQueryResult symbolStatus;

  res = hipGetProcAddress("foo", (void**)&fooFunc, hipVersion, flags, &symbolStatus);

The HIP version number is defined as an integer:

.. code-block:: cpp

  HIP_VERSION=HIP_VERSION_MAJOR * 10000000 + HIP_VERSION_MINOR * 100000 + HIP_VERSION_PATCH

CU_POINTER_ATTRIBUTE_MEMORY_TYPE
================================

To get the pointer's memory type in HIP, developers should use :cpp:func:`hipPointerGetAttributes`.

> First parameter of the function is `hipPointerAttribute_t`. Its ``type`` member variable indicates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First parameter of the function is :cpp:struct:``hipPointerAttribute_t``. Its ``type`` member variable indicates
```

whether the memory pointed to is allocated on the device or the host. For example:

.. code-block:: cpp

  double * ptr;
  hipMalloc(&ptr, sizeof(double));
  hipPointerAttribute_t attr;
  hipPointerGetAttributes(&attr, ptr); /*attr.type is hipMemoryTypeDevice*/
  if(attr.type == hipMemoryTypeDevice)
    std::cout << "ptr is of type hipMemoryTypeDevice" << std::endl;

  double* ptrHost;
  hipHostMalloc(&ptrHost, sizeof(double));
  hipPointerAttribute_t attr;
  hipPointerGetAttributes(&attr, ptrHost); /*attr.type is hipMemoryTypeHost*/
  if(attr.type == hipMemorTypeHost)
    std::cout << "ptrHost is of type hipMemoryTypeHost" << std::endl;

> Note that ``hipMemoryType`` enum values are different from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that :cpp:enum:``hipMemoryType`` enum values are different from the
```

``cudaMemoryType`` enum values.

> For example, on AMD platform, `hipMemoryType` is defined in `hip_runtime_api.h`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, on AMD platform, :cpp:enum:``hipMemoryType`` is defined in ``hip_runtime_api.h``,
```

.. code-block:: cpp

  typedef enum hipMemoryType {
      hipMemoryTypeHost = 0,    ///< Memory is physically located on host
      hipMemoryTypeDevice = 1,  ///< Memory is physically located on device. (see deviceId for specific device)
      hipMemoryTypeArray = 2,   ///< Array memory, physically located on device. (see deviceId for specific device)
      hipMemoryTypeUnified = 3, ///< Not used currently
      hipMemoryTypeManaged = 4  ///< Managed memory, automaticallly managed by the unified memory system
  } hipMemoryType;

> Looking into CUDA toolkit, it defines `cudaMemoryType` as following,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking into CUDA toolkit, it defines ``cudaMemoryType`` as follows,
```

.. code-block:: cpp

  enum cudaMemoryType
  {
    cudaMemoryTypeUnregistered = 0, // Unregistered memory.
    cudaMemoryTypeHost = 1, // Host memory.
    cudaMemoryTypeDevice = 2, // Device memory.
    cudaMemoryTypeManaged = 3, // Managed memory
  }

.. note::

>   ``cudaMemoryTypeUnregistered`` is currently not supported as ``hipMemoryType`` enum,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``cudaMemoryTypeUnregistered`` is currently not supported as :cpp:enum:``hipMemoryType`` enum value,
```

>   due to HIP functionality backward compatibility.

Reviewer: This seems off.

> The memory type translation for ``hipPointerGetAttributes`` needs to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory type translation for :cpp:func:``hipPointerGetAttributes`` needs to
```

   - ``hasDynamicParallelism``
   - Ability to launch a kernel from within a kernel

warpSize
========

Code should not assume a warp size of 32 or 64, as that is not portable between
platforms and architectures. The ``warpSize`` built-in should be used in device
code, while the host can query it during runtime via the device properties. See
the :ref:`HIP language extension for warpSize <warp_size>` for information on
how to write portable warpSize-aware code.

Porting from CUDA __launch_bounds__
===================================

CUDA defines a ``__launch_bounds__`` qualifier which works similar to HIP's

> implementation, however it uses different parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CUDA defines a ``__launch_bounds__`` qualifier which works similarly to the HIP
implementation, however, it uses different parameters:
```

  __launch_bounds__(MAX_THREADS_PER_BLOCK, MIN_BLOCKS_PER_MULTIPROCESSOR)

``MAX_THREADS_PER_BLOCK`` is the same in CUDA and in HIP. However, ``MIN_BLOCKS_PER_MULTIPROCESSOR`` in CUDA
must  be converted to ``MIN_WARPS_PER_EXECUTION_UNIT`` in HIP, which uses warps and execution units
rather than blocks and multiprocessors. This conversion can be done manually with the equation
considering the GPU's configuration mode.

* In Compute Unit (CU) mode, typical of CDNA:

.. code-block:: cpp

  MIN_WARPS_PER_EXECUTION_UNIT = (MIN_BLOCKS_PER_MULTIPROCESSOR * MAX_THREADS_PER_BLOCK) / (warpSize * 2)

* In Workgroup Processor (WGP) mode, a feature of RDNA:

.. code-block:: cpp

  MIN_WARPS_PER_EXECUTION_UNIT = (MIN_BLOCKS_PER_MULTIPROCESSOR * MAX_THREADS_PER_BLOCK) / (warpSize * 4)

Directly controlling the warps per execution unit makes it easier to reason about the occupancy,
unlike with blocks, where the occupancy depends on the block size.

The use of execution units rather than multiprocessors also provides support for
architectures with multiple execution units per multiprocessor. For example, the
AMD GCN architecture has 4 execution units per multiprocessor.

maxregcount
-----------

> The ``nvcc`` compiler will try to guess the number of registers per thread based on the launch bounds.
> ``--maxregcount X`` can be used to override the compiler's decision by enforcing a hard number of registers
> (``X``) that the compiler must not exceed. If the compiler is unable meet this requirement it will place
> additional "registers" into memory instead of using hardware registers. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``nvcc`` compiler will try to guess the number of registers per thread based on the launch bounds.
``--maxregcount X`` can be used to override the compiler's decision by enforcing a hard number of registers
(``X``) that the compiler must not exceed. If the compiler is unable to meet this requirement, it will place
additional "registers" into memory instead of using hardware registers. 
```

Reviewer 2: Is "guess" the right word?

Unlike ``nvcc``, ``amdclang++`` does not support the ``--maxregcount`` option. Users are encouraged to use
the ``__launch_bounds__`` directive since the parameters are more intuitive and portable than micro-architecture
details like registers. The directive allows per-kernel control.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike ``nvcc``, ``amdclang++`` doesn't support the ``--maxregcount`` option. You're encouraged to use
the ``__launch_bounds__`` directive as the parameters are more intuitive and portable than micro-architecture
details such as registers. The directive allows per-kernel control.

```

Driver entry point access
=========================

> The HIP runtime provides support for CUDA driver entry point access when using
> CUDA 12.0 or later. This feature allows developers to directly interact with the
> CUDA driver API, providing more control over GPU operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The HIP runtime provides support for CUDA driver entry point access when using
CUDA 12.0 or later. This feature enables developers to interact directly with the CUDA driver API, providing greater control over GPU operations.
```

Driver entry point access provides several features:

* Retrieving the address of a runtime function
* Requesting the default stream version on a per-thread basis

> * Accessing new HIP features on older toolkits with a newer driver

Reviewer 2: What does "new" mean? Generally, taking about timing is not good in docs.

      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to initialize HIP runtime." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Get the per-thread default stream
      hipStream_t stream = hipStreamPerThread;

      // Use the stream for some operation
      // For example, allocate memory on the device
      void* d_ptr;
      size_t size = 1024;
      res = hipMalloc(&d_ptr, size);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to allocate memory." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Perform some operation using the stream
      // For example, set memory on the device
      res = hipMemsetAsync(d_ptr, 0, size, stream);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to set memory." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Synchronize the stream
      res = hipStreamSynchronize(stream);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to synchronize stream." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      std::cout << "Operation completed successfully using per-thread default stream." << std::endl;

      // Free the allocated memory
      hipFree(d_ptr);

      return 0;
  }

> Accessing new HIP features with a newer driver

Reviewer 2: Again, talking about "new" - always leads to timing issues.

----------------------------------------------

HIP is designed to be forward compatible, allowing newer features to be utilized
with older toolkits, provided a compatible driver is present. Feature support
can be verified through runtime API functions and version checks. This approach
ensures that applications can benefit from new features and improvements in the
HIP runtime without needing to be recompiled with a newer toolkit. The function
:cpp:func:`hipGetProcAddress` enables dynamic querying and the use of newer
functions offered by the HIP runtime, even if the application was built with an

> older toolkit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HIP is forward compatible, allowing newer features to be utilized
with older toolkits, provided a compatible driver is present. Feature support
can be verified through runtime API functions and version checks. This approach
ensures that applications can benefit from new features and improvements in the
HIP runtime without requiring recompilation with a newer toolkit. The function
:cpp:func:`hipGetProcAddress` enables dynamic querying and the use of newer
functions offered by the HIP runtime, even if the application was built with an
older toolkit.
```

.. note::
  :cpp:func:``hipGetProcAddress`` and its CUDA counterpart ``cuGetProcAddress`` are limited
  to HIP/CUDA driver API function calls. For HIP/CUDA runtime API calls,the corresponding
  function is :cpp:func:``hipGetDriverEntryPoint`` / ``cudaGetDriverEntryPoint``. 

An example is provided for a hypothetical ``foo()`` function.

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Get the address of the foo function
  foo_t fooFunc;
  int hipVersion = 60300000; // HIP version number (e.g. 6.3.0)
  uint64_t flags = 0; // No special flags
  hipDriverProcAddressQueryResult symbolStatus;

  res = hipGetProcAddress("foo", (void**)&fooFunc, hipVersion, flags, &symbolStatus);

The HIP version number is defined as an integer:

.. code-block:: cpp

  HIP_VERSION=HIP_VERSION_MAJOR * 10000000 + HIP_VERSION_MINOR * 100000 + HIP_VERSION_PATCH

CU_POINTER_ATTRIBUTE_MEMORY_TYPE
================================

> To get the pointer's memory type in HIP, developers should use :cpp:func:`hipPointerGetAttributes`.

Reviewer 2: To return the pointer's?

First parameter of the function is `hipPointerAttribute_t`. Its ``type`` member variable indicates

> whether the memory pointed to is allocated on the device or the host. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first parameter of the function is `hipPointerAttribute_t`. Its ``type`` member variable indicates
whether the memory pointed to is allocated on the device or the host. For example:
```

.. code-block:: cpp

  double * ptr;
  hipMalloc(&ptr, sizeof(double));
  hipPointerAttribute_t attr;
  hipPointerGetAttributes(&attr, ptr); /*attr.type is hipMemoryTypeDevice*/
  if(attr.type == hipMemoryTypeDevice)
    std::cout << "ptr is of type hipMemoryTypeDevice" << std::endl;

  double* ptrHost;
  hipHostMalloc(&ptrHost, sizeof(double));
  hipPointerAttribute_t attr;
  hipPointerGetAttributes(&attr, ptrHost); /*attr.type is hipMemoryTypeHost*/
  if(attr.type == hipMemorTypeHost)
    std::cout << "ptrHost is of type hipMemoryTypeHost" << std::endl;

Note that ``hipMemoryType`` enum values are different from the
``cudaMemoryType`` enum values.

> For example, on AMD platform, `hipMemoryType` is defined in `hip_runtime_api.h`,

Reviewer 2: Italics here is correct?

Author: No. It must have been converted from Markdown? I fixed it.

.. code-block:: cpp

  typedef enum hipMemoryType {
      hipMemoryTypeHost = 0,    ///< Memory is physically located on host
      hipMemoryTypeDevice = 1,  ///< Memory is physically located on device. (see deviceId for specific device)
      hipMemoryTypeArray = 2,   ///< Array memory, physically located on device. (see deviceId for specific device)
      hipMemoryTypeUnified = 3, ///< Not used currently
      hipMemoryTypeManaged = 4  ///< Managed memory, automaticallly managed by the unified memory system
  } hipMemoryType;

> Looking into CUDA toolkit, it defines `cudaMemoryType` as following,

Reviewer 2: Looking into? Does that sound right?

Author: I reworded it.

.. code-block:: cpp

  enum cudaMemoryType
  {
    cudaMemoryTypeUnregistered = 0, // Unregistered memory.
    cudaMemoryTypeHost = 1, // Host memory.
    cudaMemoryTypeDevice = 2, // Device memory.
    cudaMemoryTypeManaged = 3, // Managed memory
  }

.. note::
  ``cudaMemoryTypeUnregistered`` is currently not supported as ``hipMemoryType`` enum,
  due to HIP functionality backward compatibility.

> The memory type translation for ``hipPointerGetAttributes`` needs to
> be handled properly on NVIDIA platform to get the correct memory type in CUDA,
> which is done in the file ``nvidia_hip_runtime_api.h``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The memory type translation for ``hipPointerGetAttributes`` needs to
be handled properly on NVIDIA platform to return the correct memory type in CUDA,
which is done in the file ``nvidia_hip_runtime_api.h``.
```

So in any HIP applications which use HIP APIs involving memory types, developers
should use ``#ifdef`` in order to assign the correct enum values depending on

> NVIDIA or AMD platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With HIP applications that use HIP memory type APIs, developers
should use ``#ifdef`` to assign the correct enum values depending on
NVIDIA or AMD platform.
```

AMD GCN architecture has 4 execution units per multiprocessor.

maxregcount
-----------

Unlike ``nvcc``, ``amdclang++`` does not support the ``--maxregcount`` option.
Instead, users are encouraged to use the ``__launch_bounds__`` directive since
the parameters are more intuitive and portable than micro-architecture details
like registers. The directive allows per-kernel control.

.. note::
  What does --maxregcount refer to here? Why is it mentioned here as it does

>   not seem to be mentioned anywhere else in this topic. 

Reviewer: The compiler flag is related to the launch bounds feature on NVIDIA GPUs. The compiler will try to guess the number of registers per thread based on the launch bounds. `-maxregcount X` can be used to override the compiler's decision by enforcing a hard number of registers (X) the compiler must not surpass. If it is unable to make do with `X` registers, it will place additional "registers" into memory instead of hardware registers.

      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to set memory." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      // Synchronize the stream
      res = hipStreamSynchronize(stream);
      if (res != hipSuccess) {
          std::cerr << "Failed to synchronize stream." << std::endl;
          return 1;
      }

      std::cout << "Operation completed successfully using per-thread default stream." << std::endl;

      // Free the allocated memory
      hipFree(d_ptr);

      return 0;
  }

Accessing new HIP features with a newer driver
----------------------------------------------

HIP is designed to be forward compatible, allowing newer features to be utilized
with older toolkits, provided a compatible driver is present. Feature support
can be verified through runtime API functions and version checks. This approach
ensures that applications can benefit from new features and improvements in the
HIP runtime without needing to be recompiled with a newer toolkit. The function
:cpp:func:`hipGetProcAddress` enables dynamic querying and the use of newer
functions offered by the HIP runtime, even if the application was built with an
older toolkit.

> An example is provided for a hypothetical ``foo()`` function.

Reviewer: Not sure why this is here. It doesn't mention CUDA, why is this in the porting guide?

Author: I think this applies to newer CUDA drivers? Does it make sense in that context, or should I just remove it?

Reviewer: No, keep the section. CUDA also has this functionality. Could you add a mention of CUDA somewhere here to make this clear?

There is also some information missing here: `hipGetProcAddress` and its CUDA counterpart `cuGetProcAddress` are limited to HIP/CUDA *driver API* function calls. For looking up HIP/CUDA *runtime API* calls, there is the corresponding function `hipGetDriverEntryPoint` / `cudaGetDriverEntryPoint` (great naming, I know). Since we're unifying the porting guides, maybe we should mention both `hipGetProcAddress` and `hipGetDriverEntryPoint` here? The function signatures are similar, so we don't need to provide examples for both; just mentioning `hipGetDriverEntryPoint` should be sufficient.
